---
title: "Install"
bg: orange  #defined in _config.yml, can use html color like '#0fbfcf'
color: black   #text color
fa-icon: cloud-download
---

This section provides full installation instructions for the Data Retriever. In
addition to the approaches described in the [Quick Start](#quickstart) it also
covers how to install using installers that don't require installing Python
directly and how to install from source.

### Method 1: Python

The easiest way to install the Data Retriever is using Python (as described in
the [Quick Start](#quickstart)). If you have Python installed run:

```
pip install retriever
```

If you don't have Python installed we recommend
installing [Anaconda](https://www.continuum.io/downloads) using the default
options in the installer and the running this command.

### Method 2: Installers

If you don't want to install Python you can download installers for Windows, OS
X and Ubuntu/Debian Linux.

#### Windows

* Click here to [download the installer](https://github.com/weecology/retriever/releases/download/v2.0.0/RetrieverSetup.exe)
* Run the downloaded `.exe` file
* Open a new terminal and type `retriever update` to download the most recent
  scripts. The terminal needs to be new so that the Data Retriever is on the path.
* The retriever should now run from the terminal. Type `retriever` and press
  enter to see the basic documentation.

#### OS X

* Click here to [download the app](https://github.com/weecology/retriever/releases/download/v2.0.0/retriever-OSX.zip)
* Unzip the `.zip` file for the most recent release
* Move the .app file into `Applications`
* Run the following commands from the Terminal to add the Data Retriever to your
  path:

{% highlight bash %}
echo "/Applications/retriever.app/Contents/MacOS" > retrieverapp
sudo mkdir -p /etc/paths.d
sudo mv retrieverapp /etc/paths.d
{% endhighlight %}

* Open a new terminal and type `retriever update` to download the most recent
  scripts. The terminal needs to be new so that the Data Retriever is on the path.
* The retriever should now run from the terminal.  Type `retriever` and press
  enter to see the basic documentation.

#### Ubuntu/Debian

* Download and run [the `.deb` file](https://github.com/weecology/retriever/releases/download/v2.0.0/python3-retriever_2.0.0-1_all.deb)
* Open a new terminal and type `retriever update` to download the most recent
  scripts. The terminal needs to be new so that the Data Retriever is on the path.
* The retriever should now run from the terminal. Type `retriever` and press
  enter to see the basic documentation.

### Method 3: Installing from Source

If you want to use the current development version of the software either use
pip to install directly from GitHub:

```
pip install git+https://git@github.com/weecology/retriever.git
```

or:

1. Clone the repository
2. `cd` into the repository directory and run `pip install .` (you may need to
    include sudo at the beginning of the command depending on your system).

More extensive documentation for those that are interested in developing can be
found [here](http://retriever.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest).

### R Package Installation

The R package wraps the command line interface, so the core Data Retriever needs
to be installed first by following the instructions above. You can then install
the R package using the devtools package (if you don't have devtools installed
run `install.packages('devtools')` first):

```
devtools::install_github('ropensci/rdataretriever')
```

This is the same method described in the [Quick Start](#quickstart).

The R package will be available on CRAN (via `install.packages()`)shortly.
